README.md, before:

# NixOS Configuration Installation Guide

This repository contains a complete NixOS configuration with Hyprland desktop environment, designed for easy installation on fresh NixOS systems.

## What You'll Get

- **Desktop Environment**: Hyprland (modern Wayland compositor) with Waybar status bar
- **Terminal**: Kitty terminal emulator with dynamic theming
- **Launcher**: Rofi application launcher with wallpaper selector mode
- **Wallpaper Management**: SWWW daemon with smooth transitions
- **Dynamic Theming**: Matugen for Material You color generation from wallpapers
- **Shell**: Fish shell with useful aliases
- **Development Tools**: Claude Code (AI coding assistant) with daily updates
- **Notifications**: Dunst notification daemon with theme integration
- **Screenshots**: Swappy screenshot tool with Grim
- **Fonts**: Fira Code Nerd Font for terminal/coding
- **Swedish Keyboard Layout**: Configured for Swedish users
- **Modular Configuration**: Easy-to-customize Hyprland config structure
- **Declarative Git**: Username and email configured automatically

## Prerequisites

- Fresh NixOS installation with "no desktop" option (as you've done)
- UEFI system (uses systemd-boot)
- Internet connection
- Basic terminal access

## Installation Steps

### Step 1: Initial System Setup

First, ensure you have git available and optionally set up Cachix for faster Claude Code downloads:

```bash
# Install git if not available (run as normal user)
nix-shell -p git

# Optional: Set up Cachix for faster Claude Code downloads
nix-env -iA cachix -f https://cachix.org/api/v1/install
cachix use claude-code
```

### Step 2: Clone This Repository

```bash
# Clone to your home directory (as normal user)
cd ~  # Go to your home directory
git clone git@gitlab.com:marerm/nixos-config.git  # Replace with your repo URL if different
cd nixos-config
```

### Step 3: Generate Hardware Configuration

The most important step - generate your machine's hardware configuration:

```bash
# Generate hardware config for your specific machine (needs sudo)
sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix

# CRITICAL: Add the hardware config to Git (flakes require this!)
git add hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
git commit -m "Add hardware configuration for this machine"
```

### Step 4: Update User Configuration (If Needed)

If your username is not "martin", you need to update the configuration:

1. Edit `hosts/common.nix` to change the username
2. Edit `flake.nix` to update the home-manager user
3. Edit `home.nix` to update the rebuild alias

**Also update your Git configuration in `home.nix`:**
- Change `userName = "Martin"` to your name
- Change `userEmail = "your-email@example.com"` to your email

### Step 5: Apply the Configuration

```bash
# Rebuild with your new configuration (needs sudo)
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos

# If you encounter any issues, try:
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos --show-trace
```

### Step 6: Reboot

```bash
# Reboot to apply changes (needs sudo)
sudo reboot
```

After reboot, you should have a fully functional Hyprland desktop environment!

## Deploying to Your Production Machine

Once you've tested in a VM and everything works, here's how to deploy to your real machine:

### Option 1: Clean Install (Recommended)
1. **Fresh NixOS install** on your production PC (same "no desktop" option)
2. **Clone your repo** with the updated configuration (including VM-tested changes)
3. **Generate new hardware config** for the production machine:
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
   git add hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
   git commit -m "Add production machine hardware configuration"
   ```
4. **Deploy**: `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos`

### Option 2: Push VM Changes First
If you made changes during VM testing:
1. **In your VM**: Push any configuration tweaks you made
   ```bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "Final configuration tweaks from VM testing"
   git push
   ```
2. **On production machine**: Pull the latest changes, then follow Option 1

**Important**: Each machine needs its own `hardware-configuration.nix` - never copy this file between machines!

## Post-Installation

### First Login to Hyprland

1. At the login screen, select Hyprland as your session
2. Log in with your user credentials
3. You'll see Waybar at the top and a clean desktop

### Essential Keybindings

The Hyprland configuration includes these default keybindings:

- `Super + Return`: Open terminal (Kitty)
- `Super + D`: Open application launcher (Rofi)
- `Super + R`: Run command launcher (Rofi)
- `Super + W`: Wallpaper selector (Rofi)
- `Super + Tab`: Window switcher (Rofi)
- `Super + Q`: Close active window
- `Super + Numbers (1-9)`: Switch workspaces
- `Super + Shift + Numbers`: Move window to workspace
- `Super + Mouse`: Move/resize windows

### Dynamic Theming Setup

1. **Create wallpaper directory**: 
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/Pictures/Wallpapers
   ```

2. **Add wallpaper images** to `~/Pictures/Wallpapers/` (supports JPG, PNG, WebP, GIF)

3. **Select wallpaper and generate theme**:
   - Press `Super + W` to open wallpaper selector
   - Choose a wallpaper to automatically:
     - Set it as background with smooth transition
     - Generate Material You colors from the image
     - Apply theme to all applications (Kitty, Waybar, Dunst, Rofi, Hyprland)

The system will automatically reload all themed applications when you change wallpapers.

### Making Changes

After making any changes to the configuration:

```bash
# Use the convenient alias (defined in home.nix)
update

# Or manually:
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake ~/nixos-config/#nixos
```

## Configuration Structure

```
nixos-config/
├── flake.nix              # Main flake configuration (includes claude-code)
├── flake.lock             # Lock file (don't edit manually)
├── home.nix               # Home Manager configuration
├── hosts/
│   ├── common.nix         # Settings for all machines
│   └── nixos/             # Your production PC config
│       ├── configuration.nix
│       └── hardware-configuration.nix  # Generated by you
└── dotfiles/              # Desktop environment configs
    ├── hypr/              # Modular Hyprland configuration
    │   ├── hyprland.conf  # Main config that sources everything
    │   └── conf/          # Modular config files
    │       ├── monitors.conf    # Your multi-monitor setup
    │       ├── keybinds.conf    # Keyboard shortcuts
    │       ├── general.conf     # Basic settings
    │       ├── decoration.conf  # Visual effects
    │       ├── animations.conf  # Animation settings
    │       ├── startup.conf     # Auto-start apps
    │       ├── input.conf       # Keyboard/mouse
    │       ├── windowrules.conf # Window rules
    │       └── env.conf         # Environment variables
    ├── waybar/            # Status bar configuration
    ├── kitty/             # Terminal configuration
    └── ...                # Other app configs
```

## Troubleshooting

### Build Fails
- Check that `hardware-configuration.nix` exists in `hosts/nixos/`
- **CRITICAL**: Ensure the hardware config is committed to Git (`git status` should show no untracked files)
- For unfree package errors (claude-code): Check that `nixpkgs.config.allowUnfree = true` is in both `hosts/common.nix` and `home.nix`
- Ensure you're running as root or with `sudo`
- Try adding `--show-trace` to see detailed error messages

### Desktop Not Starting
- Verify your system has proper graphics drivers
- Check that Hyprland is selected at login screen
- Review `/var/log/display-manager.log` for errors

### Wrong Keyboard Layout
- The config is set to Swedish layout (`se`)
- To change: edit `hosts/common.nix` and update the layout settings
- Common layouts: `us`, `uk`, `de`, `fr`

### Username Issues
- If your username isn't "martin", update all references in:
  - `hosts/common.nix` 
  - `flake.nix`
  - `home.nix`

## Customization

### Adding Packages
Add packages to `home.nix` in the `home.packages` section.

### Git Configuration
Your Git username and email are configured declaratively in `home.nix`. No need to run `git config` commands manually!

### Desktop Tweaks
- **Hyprland**: Edit individual config files in `dotfiles/hypr/conf/`:
  - `monitors.conf` - Your multi-monitor setup
  - `keybinds.conf` - Keyboard shortcuts
  - `general.conf` - Gaps, borders, layout
  - `decoration.conf` - Visual effects, blur, shadows
  - `animations.conf` - Animation settings
- **Waybar**: Edit `dotfiles/waybar/config` and `dotfiles/waybar/style.css`
- **Terminal**: Edit `dotfiles/kitty/kitty.conf`

### System Settings
Edit `hosts/common.nix` for system-wide changes that apply to all machines.

## Advanced: Multiple Machines

This configuration supports multiple machines. To add a new machine:

1. Create `hosts/your-machine-name/`
2. Add `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`
3. Update `flake.nix` to include the new configuration
4. Build with `--flake .#your-machine-name`

## Getting Help

- [NixOS Manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/)
- [Home Manager Options](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/options.html)
- [Hyprland Documentation](https://wiki.hyprland.org/)

Remember: NixOS configurations are declarative and reproducible. If something breaks, you can always rollback with `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --rollback`!

Commit message:

Parameterize user and hosts; modularize dotfiles

README.md, after:

# NixOS Configuration Installation Guide

This repository contains a complete NixOS configuration with Hyprland desktop environment, designed for easy installation on fresh NixOS systems.

## What You'll Get

- **Desktop Environment**: Hyprland (modern Wayland compositor) with Waybar status bar
- **Terminal**: Kitty terminal emulator with dynamic theming
- **Launcher**: Rofi application launcher with wallpaper selector mode
- **Wallpaper Management**: SWWW daemon with smooth transitions
- **Dynamic Theming**: Matugen for Material You color generation from wallpapers
- **Shell**: Fish shell with useful aliases
- **Development Tools**: Claude Code (AI coding assistant) with daily updates
- **Notifications**: Dunst notification daemon with theme integration
- **Screenshots**: Swappy screenshot tool with Grim
- **Fonts**: Fira Code Nerd Font for terminal/coding
- **Swedish Keyboard Layout**: Configured for Swedish users
- **Modular Configuration**: Dotfiles are shipped as optional modules for Hyprland, Waybar and more
- **Declarative Git**: Username and email configured automatically

## Prerequisites

- Fresh NixOS installation with "no desktop" option (as you've done)
- UEFI system (uses systemd-boot)
- Internet connection
- Basic terminal access

## Installation Steps

### Step 1: Initial System Setup

First, ensure you have git available and optionally set up Cachix for faster Claude Code downloads:

```bash
# Install git if not available (run as normal user)
nix-shell -p git

# Optional: Set up Cachix for faster Claude Code downloads
nix-env -iA cachix -f https://cachix.org/api/v1/install
cachix use claude-code
```

### Step 2: Clone This Repository

```bash
# Clone to your home directory (as normal user)
cd ~  # Go to your home directory
git clone git@gitlab.com:marerm/nixos-config.git  # Replace with your repo URL if different
cd nixos-config
```

### Step 3: Generate Hardware Configuration

The most important step - generate your machine's hardware configuration:

```bash
# Generate hardware config for your specific machine (needs sudo)
sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix

# CRITICAL: Add the hardware config to Git (flakes require this!)
git add hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
git commit -m "Add hardware configuration for this machine"
```

Set the provided pre-commit hook so builds fail if the hardware config is missing:

```bash
git config core.hooksPath .githooks
```

### Step 4: Update User Configuration (If Needed)

If your username is not "martin", you need to update the configuration:

1. Edit `hosts/common.nix` to change the username
2. Edit `flake.nix` to update the home-manager user
3. Edit `home.nix` to update the rebuild alias

**Also update your Git configuration in `home.nix`:**
- Change `userName = "Martin"` to your name
- Change `userEmail = "your-email@example.com"` to your email

### Step 5: Apply the Configuration

```bash
# Rebuild with your new configuration (needs sudo)
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos

# If you encounter any issues, try:
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos --show-trace
```

### Step 6: Reboot

```bash
# Reboot to apply changes (needs sudo)
sudo reboot
```

After reboot, you should have a fully functional Hyprland desktop environment!

## Deploying to Your Production Machine

Once you've tested in a VM and everything works, here's how to deploy to your real machine:

### Option 1: Clean Install (Recommended)
1. **Fresh NixOS install** on your production PC (same "no desktop" option)
2. **Clone your repo** with the updated configuration (including VM-tested changes)
3. **Generate new hardware config** for the production machine:
   ```bash
   sudo nixos-generate-config --show-hardware-config > hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
   git add hosts/nixos/hardware-configuration.nix
   git commit -m "Add production machine hardware configuration"
   ```
4. **Deploy**: `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#nixos`

### Option 2: Push VM Changes First
If you made changes during VM testing:
1. **In your VM**: Push any configuration tweaks you made
   ```bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "Final configuration tweaks from VM testing"
   git push
   ```
2. **On production machine**: Pull the latest changes, then follow Option 1

**Important**: Each machine needs its own `hardware-configuration.nix` - never copy this file between machines!

## Post-Installation

### First Login to Hyprland

1. At the login screen, select Hyprland as your session
2. Log in with your user credentials
3. You'll see Waybar at the top and a clean desktop

### Essential Keybindings

The Hyprland configuration includes these default keybindings:

- `Super + Return`: Open terminal (Kitty)
- `Super + D`: Open application launcher (Rofi)
- `Super + R`: Run command launcher (Rofi)
- `Super + W`: Wallpaper selector (Rofi)
- `Super + Tab`: Window switcher (Rofi)
- `Super + Q`: Close active window
- `Super + Numbers (1-9)`: Switch workspaces
- `Super + Shift + Numbers`: Move window to workspace
- `Super + Mouse`: Move/resize windows

### Dynamic Theming Setup

1. **Create wallpaper directory**: 
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/Pictures/Wallpapers
   ```

2. **Add wallpaper images** to `~/Pictures/Wallpapers/` (supports JPG, PNG, WebP, GIF)

3. **Select wallpaper and generate theme**:
   - Press `Super + W` to open wallpaper selector
   - Choose a wallpaper to automatically:
     - Set it as background with smooth transition
     - Generate Material You colors from the image
     - Apply theme to all applications (Kitty, Waybar, Dunst, Rofi, Hyprland)

The system will automatically reload all themed applications when you change wallpapers.

### Making Changes

After making any changes to the configuration:

```bash
# Use the convenient alias (defined in home.nix)
update

# Or manually:
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake ~/nixos-config/#nixos
```

## Configuration Structure

```
nixos-config/
├── flake.nix              # Main flake configuration (includes claude-code)
├── flake.lock             # Lock file (don't edit manually)
├── home.nix               # Home Manager configuration
├── hosts/
│   ├── common.nix         # Settings for all machines
│   └── nixos/             # Your production PC config
│       ├── configuration.nix
│       └── hardware-configuration.nix  # Generated by you
└── dotfiles/              # Desktop environment configs
    ├── hypr/              # Modular Hyprland configuration
    │   ├── hyprland.conf  # Main config that sources everything
    │   └── conf/          # Modular config files
    │       ├── monitors.conf    # Your multi-monitor setup
    │       ├── keybinds.conf    # Keyboard shortcuts
    │       ├── general.conf     # Basic settings
    │       ├── decoration.conf  # Visual effects
    │       ├── animations.conf  # Animation settings
    │       ├── startup.conf     # Auto-start apps
    │       ├── input.conf       # Keyboard/mouse
    │       ├── windowrules.conf # Window rules
    │       └── env.conf         # Environment variables
    ├── waybar/            # Status bar configuration
    ├── kitty/             # Terminal configuration
    └── ...                # Other app configs
```

## Troubleshooting

### Build Fails
- Check that `hardware-configuration.nix` exists in `hosts/nixos/`
- **CRITICAL**: Ensure the hardware config is committed to Git (`git status` should show no untracked files)
- For unfree package errors (claude-code): Check that `nixpkgs.config.allowUnfree = true` is in both `hosts/common.nix` and `home.nix`
- Ensure you're running as root or with `sudo`
- Try adding `--show-trace` to see detailed error messages

### Desktop Not Starting
- Verify your system has proper graphics drivers
- Check that Hyprland is selected at login screen
- Review `/var/log/display-manager.log` for errors

### Wrong Keyboard Layout
- The config is set to Swedish layout (`se`)
- To change: edit `hosts/common.nix` and update the layout settings
- Common layouts: `us`, `uk`, `de`, `fr`

### Username Issues
- If your username isn't "martin", change the `username` value in `flake.nix`.

## Customization

See [docs/customization.md](docs/customization.md) for tips on tweaking the configuration, adding packages and adjusting desktop settings.

## Advanced: Multiple Machines

This configuration supports multiple machines. To add a new machine:

1. Create `hosts/your-machine-name/`
2. Add `configuration.nix` and `hardware-configuration.nix`
3. Update `flake.nix` to include the new configuration
4. Build with `--flake .#your-machine-name`

## Getting Help

- [NixOS Manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/)
- [Home Manager Options](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/options.html)
- [Hyprland Documentation](https://wiki.hyprland.org/)

Remember: NixOS configurations are declarative and reproducible. If something breaks, you can always rollback with `sudo nixos-rebuild switch --rollback`!
